What is Data Science?


Data Science is a process, not an event. It is the process of using data to understand different things, to understand the world. For me is when you have a model or hypothesis of a problem, and you try to validate that hypothesis or model with your data. Data science is the art of uncovering the insights and trends that are hiding behind data. It's when you translate data into a story. So use storytelling to generate insight. And with these insights, you can make strategic choices for a company or an institution. Data science is a field about processes and systems to extract data from various forms of whether it is unstructured or structured form. Data science is the study of data. Like biological sciences is a study of biology, physical sciences, it's the study of physical reactions. Data is real, data has real properties, and we need to study them if we're going to work on them. Data Science involves data and some science. The definition or the name came up in the 80s and 90s when some professors were looking into the statistics curriculum, and they thought it would be better to call it data science. But what is Data Science? I'd see data science as one's attempt to work with data, to find answers to questions that they are exploring. In a nutshell, it's more about data than it is about science. If you have data, and you have curiosity, and you're working with data, and you're manipulating it, you're exploring it, the very exercise of going through analyzing data, trying to get some answers from it is data science. Data science is relevant today because we have tons of data available. We used to worry about lack of data. Now we have a data deluge. In the past, we didn't have algorithms, now we have algorithms. In the past, the software was expensive, now it's open source and free. In the past, we couldn't store large amounts of data, now for a fraction of the cost, we can have gazillions of datasets for a very low cost. So, the tools to work with data, the very availability of data, and the ability to store and analyze data, it's all cheap, it's all available, it's all ubiquitous, it's here. There's never been a better time to be a data scientist.


The Many Paths to Data Science


Data science didn't really exist when I was growing up. It's not something that I ever woke up and said, I want to be a data scientist when I grow up. No, it didn't exist. I didn't know I would be working in data science. When I grew up, there isn't that field called data science. And I think it's really new. Data science didn't exist until 2009, 2011. Someone like DJ Patil or Andrew Gelman coined the term. Before that, there was statistics. And I didn't want to be any of those. I wanted to be in business. And then I found data science a heck of a lot more interesting. I studied statistics, that's how I started.
Start transcript at 45 seconds0:45
I went through many different stages in my life where I wanted to be a singer and then a doctor. And then I realized that I was good at math. So I chose an area that was focused on quantitative analysis. And from then I do think that I wanted to work with data. Not necessarily data science as it's known today. The first time that I had contact with data science, when I was my first year as a mechanical engineering. And strategic consulting firms, they use data science to make decisions. So it was my first contact with data science. I had a complicated problem that I needed to solve, and the usual techniques that we had at the time couldn't help with that problem. I graduated with a math degree in the worst possible time, right after the economic crisis, and you actually had to be useful to get a job. So I went and got a degree in statistics. And then I worked enough jobs that were called data scientist that I suddenly became one. My undergraduate degree was in business, and I majored in politics, philosophy, and economics. And then I did a master's in business analytics at New York University at the Stern School of Business. When I left my undergrad, the first company I joined, it turned out that they were analyzing electronic point of sale data for retail manufacturers. And what we were doing was data science. But we only really started using that term much later. In fact, I'd say four or five years ago is when we started calling it analytics and data science. I had several options for my internship here in Canada. And one of the options was to work with data science. I used to work with project development. But I think that was a good choice. And then I start my internship with data science. I'm a civil engineer by training, so all engineers work with data. I would say the conventional use of data science in my life started with transportation research. I started building large models trying to forecast traffic on streets, trying to determine congestion and greenhouse gas emissions or tailpipe emissions. So I think that's where my start was. And I started building these models when I was a graduate student at the University of Toronto. Started working with very large data sets, looking at household samples of, say, 150,000 households from half a million trips. And that, too, I'm speaking from mid 90s when this was supposed to be a very large data set, but not in today's terms. But that's how I started. I continued working with it. And then I moved to McGill University where I was a professor of transportation engineering. And I built even bigger data models that involved data and analytics. And so I would say, yes, transportation research brought me to data science



Advice for New Data Scientists



My advice to an aspiring data scientist is to be curious, extremely argumentative and judgmental. Curiosity is absolute must. If you're not curious, you would not know what to do with the data. Judgmental because if you do not have preconceived notions about things you wouldn't know where to begin with. Argumentative because if you can argument and if you can plead a case, at least you can start somewhere and then you learn from data and then you modify your assumptions and hypotheses and your data would help you learn. And you might start at the wrong point. You may say that I thought I believed this, but now with data I know this. So, this allows you a learning process. So, curiosity being able to take a position, strong position, and then moving forward with it. The other thing that the data scientist would need is some comfort and flexibility with analytics platforms: some software, some computing platform, but that's secondary. The most important thing is curiosity and the ability to take positions. Once you have done that, once you've analyzed, then you've got some answers. And that's the last thing that a data scientist need, and that is the ability to tell a story. That once you have your analytics, once you have your tabulations, now you should be able to tell a great story from it. Because if you don't tell a great story from it, your findings will remain hidden, remain buried, nobody would know. But your rise to prominence is pretty much relying on your ability to tell great stories. A starting point would be to see what is your competitive advantage. Do you want to be a data scientist in any field or a specific field? Because, let's say you want to be a data scientist and work for an IT firm or a web-based or Internet based firm, then you need a different set of skills. And if you want to be a data scientist in the health industry, then you need different sets of skills. So figure out first what you're interested, and what is your competitive advantage. Your competitive advantage is not necessarily going to be your analytical skills. Your competitive advantage is your understanding of some aspect of life where you exceed beyond others in understanding that. Maybe it's film, maybe it's retail, maybe it's health, maybe it's computers. Once you've figured out where your expertise lies, then you start acquiring analytical skills. What platforms to learn and those platforms, those tools would be specific to the industry that you're interested in. And then once you have got some proficiency in the tools, the next thing would be to apply your skills to real problems, and then tell the rest of the world what you can do with it.


A day in the Life of a Data Scientist

I've built a recommendation engine before as part of a large organization and worked through all types of engineers and accounting for different parts of the problem. It's one of the ones I'm most happy with because ultimately, I came up with a very simple solution that was easy to understand from all levels, from the executives to the engineers and developers. Ultimately, it was just as efficient as something really complex, and they could have spent a lot more time on. Back in the university, we have a problem that we wanted to predict algae blooms. This algae blooms could cause a rise in toxicity of the water and it could cause problems through the water treatment company. We couldn't like predict with our chemical engineering background. So we use artificial neural networks to predict when these blooms will occur. So the water treatment companies could better handle this problem. In Toronto, the public transit is operated by Toronto Transit Commission. We call them TTC. It's one of the largest transit authorities in the region, in North America. And one day they contacted me and said, "We have a problem." And I said, "Okay, what's the problem?" They said, "Well, we have complaints data, and we would like to analyze it, and we need your help." I said, "Fine I would be very happy to help." So I said, "How many complaints do you have?" They said, "A few." I said, "How many?" Maybe half a million. I said, "Well, let's start working with it." So I got the data and I started analyzing it. So, basically, they have done a great job of keeping some data in tabular format that was unstructured data. And in that case, tabular data was when the complaint arrived, who received it, what was the type of the complaint, was it resolved, whose fault was it. And the unstructured part of it was the exchange of e-mails and faxes. So, imagine looking at how half a million exchanges of e-mails and trying to get some answers from it. So I started working with it. The first thing I wanted to know is why would people complain and is there a pattern or is there some days when there are more complaints than others? And I had looked at the data and I analyzed it in all different formats, and I couldn't find the impetus for complaints being higher on a certain day and lower on others. And it continued for maybe a month or so. And then, one day I was getting off the bus in Toronto, and I was still thinking about it. And I stepped out without looking on the ground, and I stepped into a puddle, puddle of water. And now, I was sort of ankle deep into water, and it was just one foot wet and the other dry. And I was extremely annoyed. And I was walking back and then it hit me, and I said, "Well, wait a second. Today it rained unexpectedly, and I wasn't prepared for it. That's why I'm wet, and I wasn't looking forward." What if there was a relationship between extreme weather and the type of complaints TTC receives? So I went to the environment Canada's website, and I got data on rain and precipitation, wind and the light. And there, I found something very interesting. The 10 most excessive days for complaints. The 10 days where people complain the most were the days when the weather was bad. It was unexpected rain, an extreme drop in temperature, too much snow, very windy day. So I went back to the TTC's executives and I said, "I've got good news and bad news." And the good news is, I know why people would complain excessively on certain days. I know the reason for it. The bad news is, there's nothing you can do about it.



Data Science Topics and Algorithms


I really enjoy regression I'd say regression was maybe one of the first concepts that I that really helped me understand data so I enjoy a regression. I really like data visualization I think it's a key element for people to get across their message to people that don't understand that well what data science is. Artificial neural networks. I'm really passionate about neural networks because we have a lot to learn with nature so when we are trying to mimic our our brain I think that we can do some applications with this behavior with this biological behavior in algorithms. Data visualization with R I love to do this. Nearest neighbor. It's the simplest but it just gets the best results so many more times than some overblown overworked algorithm that's just as likely to overfit as it is to make a good fit. So structured data is more like tabular data things that you're familiar with in Microsoft Excel format you've got rows and columns and that's called structured data. Unstructured data is basically data that is coming from mostly from web where it's not tabular it is not it's not in rows and columns it's text it's sometimes it's video and audio so you would have to deploy more sophisticated algorithms to extract data and in fact a lot of times we take unstructured data and spend a great deal of time and effort to get some structure out of it and then analyze it. So if you have something which fits nicely into tables and columns and rows go ahead that's your structured data but if you see if it's a weblog or if you're trying to get information out of webpages and you've got a gazillion web pages that's unstructured data that would require a little bit more effort to get information out of it. Let me explain regression in the simplest possible terms. If you have ever taken a cab ride a taxi ride you understand regression. Here's how it works. The moment you sit in a cab ride in a cab you see that there's a fixed amount there it's is $2.50 you rather the cab moves or you get off this is what you owe to the driver the moment you step into a cab that's a constant you have to pay that amount if you have stepped into a cab. Then as it starts moving for every meter or hundred meters the fare increases by certain amount so there's a there's a fraction there's a relationship between distance and the amount you would pay above and beyond that constant. And if you're not moving and you're stuck in traffic then every additional minute you have to pay more so as the minutes increase your fare increases as the distance increases your fare increases and while all this is happening you've already paid a base fare which is the constant this is what regression is regression tells you what the base fare is and what is the relationship between time and the fare you have paid and the distance you have traveled and the fare you've paid because in the absence of knowing those relationships and just knowing how much people traveled for and how much they paid regression allows you to compute that constant that you didn't know it was 2.50 and it would compute the relationship between the fare and and the distance and the fare and the time. That is regression.



What is the cloud?


Cloud is a godsend for data scientists primarily because you take your data, take your information, and put it in the Cloud, put it in the central storage system. It allows you to bypass the physical limitations of the computers and the systems you're using, and it allows you to deploy the analytics and storage capacities of advanced machines that do not necessarily have to be your machine or your company's machine. Cloud allows you not just to store large amounts of data on servers somewhere in California or in Nevada, but it also allows you to deploy very advanced computing algorithms and the ability to do high performance computing using machines that are not yours. So, think of it as you have some information, you can't store it, so you send it to storage space, let's call it Cloud. And the algorithms that you need to use, you don't have them with you. But then, on the Cloud, you have those algorithms available. So, what you do is you deploy those algorithms on very large data sets and you're able to do it even though your own systems, your own machines, your own computing environment would not allow you to do so. So, Cloud is beautiful. And the other thing Cloud is beautiful for is that it allows multiple entities to work with same data at the same time. So, you can be working with the same data that your colleagues in, say, Germany, and another team in India, and another team in Ghana, they are collectively working and they're able to do so because the information, and the algorithms, and the tools, and the answers, and the results, whatever they needed is available at a central place which we call Cloud. So, Cloud is beautiful. At the Big Data University which is an IBM initiative, we have these courses people can take and learn about data science. But at the same time, we provide these Cloud-based environment for not only analytics but also for working with big and small data. So, one of the products that is integrated with Big Data University is Data Scientist Workbench. Data Scientist Workbench is an internet-based solution. You log in, and the moment you log in, you now have access to some very advanced computing environments. As simple as R in RStudio, and data and algorithms to define the data set using OpenRefine, but also the ability to work with very large data sets using technologies like Spark. So, the advantage of working with Data Scientist Workbench is not only that you have the ability to work with these advanced algorithms into computing platforms, but you also have the ability to work with very large data set, because Spark is integrated and it's all in the Cloud. You don't have to maintain it. You don't have to download it. You don't have to worry about updating it. All is being done for you in the Cloud by the Data Scientist Workbench.



